.device xgp; font 1 "carl;30vrs"; font 2 "carl;25vgbs"; font 3 "carl;30vrbs"; font 4 "fonts;25vri"; font 5 "carl;37vrbs"; font 6 "carl;s30grk";
.require "CARL;PUBMAC >" sourcefile

.!xgpcommands_";squish"

.area text lines 3 to 45
.page frame 45 high 85 wide
.title area heading line 1 to 2
.tabspace
.every heading (5DRAFT*,{page},5DRAFT*)

.tabspace

.place text
.next page
.fill


.begin center
.turn on "{"
.comment "}";
{date}
.end

.skip 4

.begin nofill
TO:  Area II Committee
FROM:  Carl Hewitt
SUBJECT: Oral Examination for Mr. Gerald Barber
.end

.begin para
	The oral examination for Mr. Barber was held on November 23, 1977.
The committee members were Professors Gallager, Winston,  and Hewitt
[Chairperson].
On the basis of demonstrated research potential
and performance on the oral examination, the committee recommends that Mr. Barber
be deemed to have passed his
oral examination.
.end

.begin para
	The examination began with Mr. Barber presenting his masters thesis
which was done at the University of Idaho.
The topic of the research was a program to do optical character recognition.
The committee feels that Mr. Barber explained his research quite clearly. 
.end

.begin para
	Mr. Barber described some research which he is currently doing
with Professor Hewitt on the development of formal techniques for the
description of office procedures in which he has made several important contributions.
Professor Hewitt is quite pleased with his progress and a doctoral thesis proposal
should be forthcoming before the end of the academic year.
.end

.begin para
	Professor Gallager asked Mr. Barber to consider the problem of synchronizing
the action of two modules which can only communicate via a noisy channel which
can drop messages.  If the two modules have no prior agreement as to the time at which
they will act and neither can act alone without being certain that the other will
act at the same time then the problem is impossible to solve.
After some guidance Mr. Barber was able to give an informal proof of this
result.
Professor Hewitt asked Mr. Barber to write a recursive LISP procedure to
reverse a list at all levels.  Mr. Barber was able to do this with only one minor
false start.
Professor Winston asked him how he would program a depth first tree search.
After this he was asked how he would program a breadth first tree search and
then how he would program a best first search.  With some guidance Mr. Barber
realized that all of the programs are variants of one basic schema.
.end
.begin para
	The committee feels that Mr. Barber should speak more forcefully and
be more dynamic and definitive in his presentations and answers to questions.  Mr. Barber
seemed quite nervous at the examination which could account for some
of this difficulty.  The committee feels that some teaching experience could help him overcome
some of these problems.
.end
.begin para
	Mr. Barber ranked 50 out of 110 on the Preliminary Written Examination.
He did rather poorly in the topic of
discrete mathematics.  The committee recommends that he work to remedy this
deficiency.
.end
