
.device xgp; font 1 "carl;30vrs"; font 2 "carl;25vgbs"; font 3 "carl;30vrbs"; font 4 "fonts;25vri"; font 5 "carl;37vrbs"; font 6 "carl;s30grk";

.require "CARL;PUBMAC >" sourcefile

.!xgpcommands_";squish"

.area text lines 3 to 45
.page frame 45 high 85 wide
.title area heading line 1 to 2
.tabspace
.every heading (,{page},)

.tabspace

.place text
.next page
.fill


.begin center
.turn on "{"
.comment "}";
July 15, 1976
.end

.skip 4

.begin nofill
TO:  Area II Committee
FROM:  Carl Hewitt
SUBJECT:  Area Examination for Charles Rich
.end

.begin para
	The area examination for Charles Rich was held on May 24, 1976.
The committee members were Professors Szolovitz, Winston, and Hewitt [Chairperson].
The committee examined Mr. Rich in the general area of Automating the Construction
of Reliable Software.
On the basis of disappointing performance in answering technical
questions in his proposed thesis area,
the committee recommends that Mr. Rich retake the
area examination in the fall.
.end


.begin para
	The papers assigned for the exam within the topic of "Control Structures
in Artificial Intelligence"
were:
.skip
.begin narrow 12,0
.begin para
"An Overview of Production Systems"
Davis and King.  Stanford. AI Memo.  AIM-J71.
.end
.begin para
"Micro-PLANNER Reference Manual"
Sussman, Winograd, and Charniak. MIT AI Memo. 203A.
.end
.begin para
"An Actor-Based Computer Animation Language".
Kenneth Kahn.  AI Working Paper 120.
.end
.end
.skip
The committee was not very happy with the written critique produced
by Mr. Rich but felt that it was probably difficult to produce a better one.
In his oral presentation,  Mr. Rich presented a quite good discussion
of the overall issues in control structure for A.I. systems.
The committee felt that Mr. Rich did a quite good job throughout the
examination in explaining top level goals and methodology.
However, his performance was disappointing on the technical questions
discussed below.
.end

.begin para
	Mr. Rich was asked to construct a LISP function which computed
the set of all subsets of its argument.  Mr. Rich had considerably difficulty
with this problem.
Professor Hewitt asked Mr. Rich to provide a specification
for an integer division algorithm for positive integers.
Mr. Rich was able to come up with
the specification that the numerator should be equal to the quotient times
the divisor plus the remainder.
However, he left out the specification that the remainder should be
non-negative and less than the divisor.
He was then asked to develop a flow chart which implemented the specifications.
Unfortunately, the flow chart developed was overly complicated for the
task.  Twice during the development of the implementation,
Mr. Rich completed a flow chart and thought that the program was correct.
However, both on both cases it turned out that there was a bug.
Mr. Rich had tremendous difficulty in attempting to prove that
his final flow chart was correct.
.end

.begin para
	In general, the committee found that Mr. Rich's performance on
constructing programs and proving them correct was disappointing.
The programs which he developed were overly complicated.  They
were developed by a process of patching with no obvious overview
of the entire process. 
Therefore the recommendation is that he retake the examination in the
fall with emphasis on technical aspects of the area.
In particular the committee recommends that the next examination concentrate
on the formal mathematical basis for program semantics and
proofs of correctness.
.end
